Hello, and welcome to the reality show
about exercises in Python.
It's not a very exciting reality show, but
I'm your host, Charles Severance.
And these exercises come from Python for
Informatics: Exploring Information.
And, of course this material's Creative
Commons Attribution,
as well as the book and other materials.
So by now I hope that you're getting
pretty good at using Python.
Hopefully the pythonlearn materials
have been helpful to get things set up.
So the exercise that we're working on
today is
Exercise 7.3 from the Files chapter, and
our goal here is
is simply to read through a file and
print
out the contents of a file, all in upper
case.
Executing the program will look like this
screen.
We obviously have to prompt for the file
name, because it says enter the file name
and
then we give it a file name, or we
get our file from this URL shown here,
py4inf.com/code/mbox-short.txt.
So let's do that.
And so let's, let's go ahead and do this.
So the first thing we're going to do is
go to the web, and here's Python for
Informatics.
By the time you're seeing this maybe it'll
be even prettier.
And the URL is in this code samples.
And this is old school user look and feel.
And I'm going to open this, and this is
the data that we're going to work with.
The mailbox format data.
And I'm going to save this as a text
file.
And I'm going to put it in my desktop.
In a folder Python for Informatics and I'm
going to put this mailbox file
right in the same place as all of my other
files.
I'm going to verify that that's looking
really good now by opening
up a Terminal window, and I go into that
folder.
And that, that folder right there is in my
desktop.
Python.
And there we are. I got my file.
Okay?
So I'll open up TextWrangler.
Make it a little smaller.
Okay.
And then I could open this file in
TextWrangler if I wanted to.
mbox-short, and so there it is.
If I want to, like, look at it really
closely.
Or we could open, I don't want that.
I want to make a new Python program.
And so we will, you know, well, the
first thing
we gotta do is, we gotta enter a file
name.
So let's do that.
I'll call my variable fname equals
raw_input, enter a file name,
colon, insert a space, oops.
Switch back to single quotes.
You could use double quotes or single
quotes but single quotes are cool.
Double quotes make it look like you're a
Java programer
that can't remember whether it's single
quotes or double quotes.
Python doesn't care about it, but the
cool people use single quotes.
So use cool.
I mean if you want to be cool.
I'm trying to be cool.
You can see I sometimes don't get it at
all.
I'm not that cool.
Okay.
So then I want to print file name, and
let's save this,
and then as soon as we save it, you'll see
that, python for informatics,
I'm going to call the program shout.py,
and as
soon as we get it, we get nice syntax
coloring, which helps us understand if
we've made any,
like, typographical error like that, or
something like that so.
So we'll save it and if I come here right
now I'll see
shout.python, shout.py, and I say python
shout.py.
Enter file name, fred. Looks good.
OK? I didn't do much else.
So, the thing we've gotta do, of course,
to read a file, is we can't just read it.
We're going to have make them get a file
name, right?
So we'll call our file handle fhand
variable equals open
and then fname is the file.
And then, of course, we can write a for
loop for line in, now line is just
a variable name, for and in are keywords,
but line is just a variable name, and
fhand.
And that's because the file handle, file
handle is a type of sequence that we can
iterate through in a for loop, and this
loop will run for each successive
line in the file.
And so I will just say print line to kind
of know that my loop is actually iterating
through the file.
So we've got four lines, and we'll say
fred again.
And son of a gun if the open kind of
blows up, because there is no fred.
So we have to run a program here that's
actually in the directory.
mbox-short.
I've shortened the long one, so that
mbox-short, is
just a, you know, it's a little easier,
smaller.
It's just the first few lines of the full
mbox file.
Okay so here we go, and, there we are,
there we are,
and I'm going to have to make that a
little bit bigger.
So if we go up here and we look at this
one of the things that we see is that it
doesn't look
like the file because there is a blank
line after every line.
And you say oh crap, why is that?
Well, you're just going to have to get
used to the idiom that is
trimming lines, and so I'm going to,
I'm going to trim.
I'm only going to trim on the right side.
Line.rtrim.
I'm going to trim the white space on the end
and the problem is, is there's a
newline here, and that print statement is
also adding a newline.
So I'm just going to trim it.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
Save that.
Make it smaller so we can kind of see it
going at the same time.
I use Cmd+K on my MacIntosh to clear the
screen.
You can actually use cls in Windows if you
want.
And so I'm going to run the same program
again.
mbox-short.txt, and now we should.
Oh, oh, oh, it's not rtrim.
Object, str object has no attributes
rtrim, because it's rtrim
in some other language, and I'm
forgetting, because I'm switching
between languages, but I just, there's a
no method, and
you'll notice that the syntax coloring is
not right either.
And it's rstrip.
How many people caught that?
Not many, probably.
I didn't even catch it.
Let's try it again.
mbox-short.txt.
Okay, so now it's still kind of ugly and
nasty,
but you can kind of see there's, when we
print
the file out here, there's no extra blank
lines
and that's because the newlines have been
stripped off.
We're still getting a newline from the print
statement, but we only want one newline.
Okay, so we're getting pretty close.
We've got, in this little loop right here,
we've
got the line, we've taken off the white
space.
So now it's a pretty simple task to just
say line equals line.upper,
and then we're going to convert the whole
thing to uppercase and run it again.
mbox-short.txt
There we go.
It is shouting, shouting, shouting,
because everything is in upper case.
So that's pretty straightforward, not too
much error checking.
Let me show you one, one sort of Python
idiom that allows you to contract this.
So in a sense, this is a function call.
It says, give me back a new string, which
is a copy of line with the white space
removed.
Well, this is a string, and we can apply a
string library method to it, as well.
So I can actually tack on the end of this
the upper, and I can take this line out.
And now I can do it all in one line.
And this code says, take line, strip the
white space, and then take
the resulting white space free, and
convert it to upper case.
And that should accomplish the same thing.
Let's make sure
we don't have blank lines.
We don't have blank lines.
So everything is fine.
Okay?
So we could add a few things.
Let's add something to this.
We've got their specifications done.
We're kind of done at the minimum, but let
me show you something cool here.
Let's just say you got tired of typing
that file name all the time.
Here's a little trick.
If the length of fname
is less than one.
I'll just say equals zero.
You're going to set the fname, fname
equals mbox-short.txt.
So that basically means that if we
enter a real file
name, the length of the file name will be
greater than zero.
If we don't, we're just going to assume
we're just going to change that
variable to fname, and then when we open
it, we'll have it.
So watch this.
Oh, better save that.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
So I could type a file name but if I hit
Enter, it just does that.
Look how convenient that is.
So, in effect it was creating a default, as
it were.
When the user types enter, they sort of do
their thing.
Okay?
So, that's pretty much it for the
Exercise 7.3.
The shouting at exercise.